---
title: "Plan 75’s Choices: Where Life Happens For You, Not To You"
source: "https://www.anthologymatt.com/article/plan-75s-choices-where-life-happens-for-you-not-to-you"
date: "2024-02-23"
type: "article"
tags: ["film", "ethics", "aging", "Japan", "dystopia", "personal reflection"]
published: true
project: "Autonomous Matt"
summary: "A reflection on Chie Hayakawa’s dystopian film *Plan 75*, exploring how agency, aging, and ethical choice converge in a near-future Japan—and how the film mirrors personal insights at age fifty."
---
What would you do if the government offered an incentivized euthanasia plan for everyone as soon as they turned seventy‑five? This is the dystopian reality offered by Japanese director Chie Hayakawa’s wonderful 2022 film *Plan 75*. Framed as a legislative means of addressing Japan’s increasingly elderly population, it does what all great movies do. It asks us to believe in a future just that little bit different from our own, and inside of which we may have to make some uncomfortable ethical choices…

Hayakawa’s film details the bureaucratic mechanics of how such a program might work, and often slips more into believable documentary than dystopian fiction. There are decisions made on paper, and decisions made with friends, but with a particular focus on those responsible for implementing such a program for their older, eligible subjects… 

It all sounds like an episode of *Black Mirror*, but there’s a discreet, respectful tenderness in abundance. We see the participants in the program, primarily centered around a single elderly, lonely woman wonderfully played by Chieko Baisho, for whom the program becomes a means to live, rather than die…

The older I get, the more I think about these kinds of decisions… I am often caught in that limbic space between what I want to do and what I have to do. And that’s the same dilemma… Her choice becomes ethical duty over individual freedoms…

Last October, I turned fifty. And on my birthday, I did something I never do, but really should... I spent a day in Manhattan, on my own… It was part ghost tour, but also part exorcism… It reminded me of all the friends and colleagues, long gone… If you’re ever lucky enough to have a friendship strong enough to survive this, hold on to it…

In the finish, *Plan 75* is about choice. Who gets to determine our choices and why… Only at aged fifty have I realized that the choices I don’t make are often happening for me, not to me… It doesn’t matter what happens around me, it’s what I choose to do next that’s the important thing. And like Mishi… where just sitting outside your old apartment building and reminiscing about the things which have made you… you, becomes truly joyous.
