---
title: I Want 'Em Conscious And Talkative: The Long Good Friday
author: Matthew Shadbolt
source: https://www.anthologymatt.com/article/i-want-em-conscious-and-talkative-the-long-good-friday
date: 2025-01-07
tags: [film criticism, British cinema, The Long Good Friday, Bob Hoskins, gangster films]
summary: A powerful reflection on the political and cinematic significance of "The Long Good Friday," exploring its depiction of London’s criminal underworld amid IRA turmoil.
key_insight: The film transcends genre by exposing the volatile collision of capitalism and ideology, using Hoskins’ Harold Shand to mirror a Britain on the brink of transformation.
---

Growing up in England in the seventies, I remember watching the grainy news footage of carnage caused by Irish sectarian violence. I’d later witness it first hand when I moved to London as a student in the nineties and was near enough to hear one of the bomb blasts blow hundreds of windows out of a skyscraper. I still don’t understand many of the complex historical intricacies of the Irish Republican Army’s motivations, but I do know that their domestic terror activities on mainland England hung like an ominous specter over much of the time I was growing up.

”I'm setting up the biggest deal in Europe with the hardest organization since Hitler stuck as swastika on his jockstrap.”

This is the social backdrop for one of the best British movies ever made, The Long Good Friday, which pits the financial motivations of London’s gangsters against the political actions of the IRA in the early 1980s. It would introduce the world to George Harrison’s Handmade Films, which went on to make some of the most wonderful British movies of all time, including Withnail and I, Time Bandits and Monty Python’s The Life of Brian. It also introduced the world to Bob Hoskins, for whom it would launc...

”Well, let's put it this way. Apart from his arsehole being about fifty yards away from his brains, and the choirboys playing hunt the thimble with the rest of him, he ain't too happy.”

The plot is simple, but violent. Hoskins plays gangster Harold Shand, who controls a network of criminality centered in East London, but which reaches as far as New York. He’s surrounded by an inner circle of associates, including Helen Mirren’s Victoria, who plays the role of sophisticated moll to wonderful effect. Derek Thompson, who never did much again in the movies but who’d go on to become a household name every Saturday evening as the star of the BBC’s long running hospital drama Casualty is Shan...

”I'm glad I found out in time just what a partnership with a pair of wankers like you would've been. A sleeping partner's one thing, but you're in a fucking coma! No wonder you got an energy crisis your side of the water!”

British gangster movies weren’t anything new in 1980, but they’d never been made quite like this before, and sparked a wave of realism which would reach its peak with films such as Guy Ritchie’s Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels and Snatch, both of which owe a great debt to The Long Good Friday. Hoskins is wonderfully sinister as the threatened kingpin, always with the promise of violence bubbling away underneath the surface. British gangster films, especially those set in London, always deliver some...

”It must've been just after you saw him and just before Alan saw him. Otherwise, you'd have noticed, wouldn't you? I mean, a geezer nailed to the floor. A man of your education would definitely have spotted that, wouldn't he?”

There’s also some fantastic set pieces through the film, such as when Shand tells his assembled guests as they cruise down the Thames on his private yacht of his entrepreneurial aspirations towards doing business in Europe, something which reflected a deeply optimistic Thatcherite spirit of the times but would dissolve into the divisive chaos of Brexit many years later. And true to all gangster films, there always has to be a torture scene where the protagonist interrogates his suspects. Here it’s Sha...

”What I'm looking for is someone who can contribute to what England has given to the world: culture, sophistication, genius. A little bit more than a hot dog, know what I mean?”

Both Shand’s criminals and the IRA use violence to achieve their ends, but their ends could not be more different. Where money is everything for Shand’s gangsters, it means nothing to the Irish terrorists. Politics is simply a corruptible opportunity towards economic prosperity for Shand, but for the IRA politics is a struggle towards justice to be served and historic wrongs to be set right. Murder is a common weapon, and the fear and intimidation used by both sides is everywhere. If Hoskins carries th...

”Remember, scare the shit out of them, but don't damage them. I want 'em conscious and talkative. And lads, try and be discreet, eh?”

While The Long Good Friday is absolutely a product of its time, it is at its core, just a great story of deception, greed and violence, with early eighties London itself one of the main characters. In the final shot, Hoskins’ Shand is being driven away to his fate at Irish gunpoint, and the camera lingers on a tight shot of him considering his next move, which we as the audience know will be futile. Led away to die as the cycle of violence continues. But this uncomfortable shot is reflective of the movie...
